What's up everyone? Zilly here. Just
picked up the new AMD Ryzen 7 9800 X3D
and paired it with the Asus X870F
stricks motherboard and I'm setting this
whole thing up from scratch right now.
Instead of just telling you what to do,
you're literally going to follow along
with me as I configure the system for
the first time. Fresh build, fresh BIOS,
and I'll show you every single step I
take to get maximum performance out of
this combo.
All right, so here's what we're working
with. The 9800 X3D, obviously the king
of gaming CPUs right now, and the X870F
stricks, which is in my opinion's sweet
spot board for this CPU. First
impressions, the 9800 X3D box is very
unpleasant looking compared to the boxes
of things like the 1400 KS. The X870F
strips has excellent build quality. It's
a solid platform for optimization. First
thing to do is BIOS updates. We're
running BIOS version 1203. Before we do
anything else, I'm checking if there's a
newer version available because with
brand new CPUs like this, BIOS updates
are critical. So, as expected, there's
definitely going to be a newer BIOS
available. This is why step one is
always checking for updates, especially
with bleeding edge hardware like this.
Just search your motherboard's model and
ensure it's the correct one by
double-checking what it says in system
information in Windows and download the
latest BIOS by going to driver and tools
and BIOS and firmware and then just
looking for the latest BIOS version. For
me, the latest version is 1605 at the
time of recording. Slightly newer than
what shipped with this board.
Downloading now. And I'll create a FAT
32 partition on my SSD labeled BIOS
where I'll place the BIOS update into.
So, it's downloaded. Now, we're just
going to go to search and search disk
management.
And just right click on your C drive and
click shrink, for example.
All you need is 100 megabytes and then
just press shrink.
Right click on the unallocated space to
mix. New simple volume. Next, next.
Next. Bio system. Ensure it says BAT 32.
And then volume label. You can change it
to BIOS. and then press next and finish.
Then just take your BIOS update files
and drag them over to the new partition
that you just made and just ensure it
looks like this.
Back into BIOS, all we're going to do is
click advanced mode on the bottom and
head over to tool at the top. Click ASUS
Easy Flash3 utility.
Find the file. It's usually going to be
one of these 96 megabyte ones. So, as
you guys can see, it's right here. Just
click on the file like that. Just keep
pressing yes,
and it should start updating just like
so. And we're flashing. This is going to
take a couple of minutes, so it's a
perfect time to talk about why this
matters. With the 900X3D being so new,
AMD is constantly improving the Agisa
microode. I've seen five to 10 FPS
differences just from BIOS updates on X3
chips. So, never skip this step.
All right, so set them back up with the
new BIOS. Now, I'm going to walk through
this interface with you and show you
exactly what I'm looking at.
So, head over to advanced mode on the
bottom right. And this is where the real
optimization happens. Let me show you
the layout. So, AI tweaker, this is
where memory and CPU overclocking
happens at advanced. This is where
system configuration and AMD specific
settings are located at. Monitor is just
hardware monitoring and fan control.
Boot is just boot options and secure
boot settings. What I'm looking for
first is making sure everything is
detected correctly. CPU shows as 900x3D.
Memory showing up good. Now we're ready
to start optimizing. So first head over
to AI tweaker. AI overclock tuner. I
recommend DOCP1 or Expo one or X XMPP1.
Whichever one that pops up for you,
always choose number one. And what
number one does, it loads up the
primaries on your RAM sticks, but
everything else is trained from your
motherboard. The OCP2, Expo 2, XMPP2
just loads the full XMPP profile from
your memory sticks, which just tends to
be a little bit slower compared to the
motherboard training some of the
timings. So, in general, just use DOCP1,
XMPP1, or Expo 1. Now, since these RAM
sticks are 7,200 MHz RAM sticks on AMD,
that's not ideal if you're going to be
using the OCP, XMPP, or Expo. So, for
memory frequency, I'm going to be
dropping this down to 6,000 just to stay
in that 1:1 ratio range with the
Infinity Fabric.
This gives you maximum stability and
maximum performance. Now I'm going to
set the timing. So go to VRAN timing
control and we're going to scroll down.
Refresh interval. Select that. And I
like setting it to 32767.
And scroll down. TRDL. I like setting it
to 12. TRDS. I like setting it to eight.
These are solid timings for DDR56000.
That should work with most memory kits.
Now, if we scroll down to the bottom,
there is one more setting that I like to
change, which is bank swap mode. I like
setting this to swap APU. Then go back.
FK frequency on auto should be perfectly
fine. However, if you start changing the
memory frequency above 6,000, you are
going to have to play with the FLK
frequency. Now, let's head over to
precision boost overdrive.
VRM throttling, I like to disable this
setting cuz it's throttling your VRM,
and you don't really need that.
Precision boost overdrive. I like
setting this to enhancement. And then
thermal limit, setting it to level one.
Then CPU boost clock override set to
enabled positive. This is going to
increase the precision boost overdrive
maximum boost clocks. So we're able to
hit 5.4 GHz on the CPU. Then max CPU
boost clock override. Make sure to type
200 for that.
Now scroll down and head over to curve
optimizer.
I like setting this to all cores. And
this is where we can get a little bit of
extra performance just by undervolting
our processor. What I like to do is send
the sign to negative and just starting
off with a -15 all core optimizer
magnitude. Now this is very conservative
conservative and it should work on most
CPUs. This undervolts the CPU slightly
which often lets it boost higher while
running cooler.
Now press escape twice.
For tunings configuration for gaming,
make sure to set this to legacy. And
then scroll down.
Now, here's the important part. Turbo
game mode. You'll see this option here,
and a lot of people enable it thinking
the settings automatically equals
better. Let me explain why I don't
enable it on Ryzen 7s or under like a
900 X3D or a 7800 X30. Turbo game mode
disables SMT. That's simultaneous
multi-threading. The 900 X3D has eight
cores and 16 threads. If I enable turbo
game mode, I drop to eight threads
total. That's fine for a 16 core CPU
like a 9950X3D
where you're still left with plenty of
threads. But the 900X3D, no way. Modern
games and productivity tasks need those
threads and often have weird micro
stutters when disabling S&T on AMD. So,
turbo game mode stays off as we could do
the rest of the settings it does
manually.
Now, let me show you the other settings
I'm configuring while we're here. Go to
advanced and then go to CPU
configuration. Disable PSS support and
disable SVM mode. NX mode, please leave
enabled. Some anti-cheats do use this,
so it's better off enabled. SVM mode is
related to virtualization, so if you
need it for blue stacks or Google Play
games, leave it enabled. Then go back,
go to PCI subsystem settings, and for
the games I'm playing with my 9070 XT,
I'm probably going to keep a resize bar
support enabled for testing. However, if
you're on a Nvidia graphics card and you
use a lot of games, then I recommend
disabling above 4G decoding and
disabling resize bar support. They're
pretty much useless 99% of the time, and
they hurt 1% lows. Go back. Go to USB
configuration. Legacy USB support. You
can set this to auto. Then go back. Go
to onboard devices configuration.
We want to disable the first two
settings right here that say ASPM. ASPM
is a power saving feature for your PCIe
ports. Then scroll down. Both of the USB
power delivery states. I like turning
them off. It's a personal preference
choice at the end of the day. Go back.
Go to NB configuration. And to avoid
issues with games just hiccup hiccuping
and picking different graphics cards, I
recommend disabling the integrated
graphics on your CPU unless you use
them. 99% of people do not use the
integrated graphics, which is the
display port or HDMI port on your
motherboard. So, if you're a normal
person and you use a graphics card,
disable the integrated graphics to avoid
issues and reduce latency. Go back, go
to AMD CBS, and I like disabling global
sestate control. I've seen plenty of
people recommending it to leave auto or
enabled. For my testing, I've seen
better results with disabled, especially
with latency, so just disable it. Immu,
this is the same thing as SVM mode. It's
related to virtualization and some
security features. I like disabling it.
ECC, this is error correction for DDR5.
So, if you're going to be overclocking
your memory, you need to disable this
even if you don't want to. Then, app
compatibility database. I'm not going to
go over it right now, but just set to
disabled as you most likely will not
need it.
Now, if I press F6, it's going to bring
up the PU fan control. What I doing is
setting my CPU cooler to full speed,
especially on AMD with precision boost
or drive. How it works is that the lower
temperatures that you have, the higher
the boost clock of the CPU is going to
be. So, lower temperatures basically
equals more FPS. So in that case, I
recommend everybody set your CPU fan and
AIO pump to full speed. Everything else
can honestly be set to turbo as it won't
really hurt anything.
Now let's head over to tool at the top
and go to auto install is utilities. I
like disabling all of this because you
don't really need any of these ASUS
utilities and they're most likely
bloware. Then all we going to do is go
back, go to SUS user profile, and we're
going to name this profile name BIOS
settings or you can name it Zilly video.
Go to save to profile. Press enter.
Press yes. And then just click save
changes and reset.
Now, here's what I want to show you. the
actual performance differences between
stock BIOS settings and our optimized
configuration. I ran some tests before
we started this optimization. So, let's
let me show you the difference our BIOS
optimization makes in actual games. In
Call of Duty Black Ops 6 at 1080p, stock
BIOS settings give us 321 average FPS,
1% low of 263. Frame times were
inconsistent with some stuttering. Now,
with optimized BIOS settings, we're
getting an average FPS of 368, 1% low of
295, and smooth, consistent frame times.
That's a 47 FPS improvement, nearly 15%
better performance just from BIOS
optimization, and without any
overclocking. Stock BIOS settings in
Fortnite at 1080p, average FPS 993.7,
1% low 595. Lots of frame drops during
builds and explosions. Optimized BIOS
settings, average FPS, 149, 1% low
605.2. stable performance even in
chaotic scenarios. 55.3 FPS improvement.
That's a 5% better performance.
Surprisingly, as long as my Windows is
optimized, which I'm currently running
my optimized Windows, Fortnite runs
great on stock BIOS for these PC specs
with the new performance mode. However,
legacy performance mode has a lot of
stutters on AMD Radeon GPUs. The memory
optimization and precision boost
overdrive settings are doing exactly
what we want. Better performance, more
consistent frame times, and higher frame
rates. Now, full transparency, not
everything always goes perfect on the
first try. Let me show you what I'd do
if we ran into issues. If the system
didn't boot after our changes, I would
press the clear CMOS using the button on
the motherboard in the back. Start
without XMPP, DOCP, or Expo and do the
settings one step at a time. If we had
memory instability, I'd make sure sticks
are in slots two and four. I'd make sure
the RAM sticks are not above 6,000 or
drop them down to 6,000 and make sure to
have the latest BIOS update for our
motherboard. If temperatures were too
high, turn up the fan speeds using Q fan
control. Check the thermal paste
application and consider checking out
the CPU cooler or replacing it with a
better one. The key is methodical
testing. Change one thing at a time,
test ability, then move on to the next
optimization. This setup is now dialed
in, but it's not a set and forget
situation. Here's what I'll be doing
going forward. Monthly, I'll just
monitor temperatures during heavy gaming
sessions, keep an eye on system
stability, and every few months, I'd
benchmark comparison to make sure
performance isn't degrading, and clean
up the dust. So, we've got a perfectly
optimized 900 X3D system, GDR5 6000
running stable, CPU boosting properly,
temperatures under control, and gaming
performance that's absolutely crushing
it. This is exactly the level of
optimization I bring to every client
system. The difference between stock
settings and proper tuning is massive.
We're talking 10 to 15% performance
improvements just from BIOS
configuration. What do you think of this
setup process? Drop your questions in
the comments. I love helping people get
the most out of their hardware. And if
you want this level of optimization for
your own system, check out the
consultation services in the
description. Hit like if following along
helped you optimize your own build and
subscribe for more realtime PC building
and optimization content. And I'll catch
you in the next one.